Hello and welcome back.
Let's have a look at what is a sprite sheet.
So in this lecture we're going to have a look at some terminology as well to make sure that we're all
talking about the same thing.
So Sprite itself is an image that's integrated into a larger scene.
Essentially you could almost see your layers when you working guimpe as sprites that you're building
up upon one another to create a a much larger image.
By the end of it.
Now of course in games This allows you to move characters independently of the background et cetera
et cetera.
Now a sprite sheet is simply many of the sprites combined onto one image and there are several ways
that you can go about cutting a sprites up and whether an eye has an opaque or transparent background
and we'll get into that more in the next lecture when we go about creating our own spreadsheets.
Now typically Sprite sheets themselves are associated with the 2d animations and the G UI elements the
graphical user interface elements like buttons and menu options and things along those lines a texture.
ATLAS is something you may have come across before and is essentially the same thing.
However it is used differently it has a different use.
It is essentially a series of textures all combined onto one image rather than having them as separate
images.
Now before we move on to sprite's sheets themselves we do need to discuss the power of two.
It comes up a lot on forums.
People are very confused about it.
Essentially we're talking about the pixel to pixels ratio of a particular image or Sprite itself.
And it's where you've got two to the power of a particular number that is a whole number a positive
integer.
Now typical ranges in graphics are from two to the zero which is one pixel in width or height to two
to the 12 which is around 4000 when it is 4000 and ninety six pixels in width or height.
Now these are quite large and the other one is obviously quite small.
The x y dimensions themselves can actually be different.
That is important to know so if you need a rectangular texture you can make it by having maybe 256 by
five hadn't done 12 or even one by 512.
If that happens to be what you need now it is usually not necessary these days to have your textures
as a power of two.
But it is still recommended and you'll find it everywhere to prevent uncontrolled blurring or border
issues.
If you've made your images and sprite's a power of two.
You can help avoid these issues especially when it comes to optimization like MIT mapping which do decrease
the image sizes.
One good example here is that if you have an image that's nine pixels wide and you need to divide it
in two where do you divide it divide it four or five.
That's where some blurring or border issues can occur and not power of two is referred to as n pot.
And that's simply anything that's not power of two.
So a quick example here of a optimized spreadsheet where we've got four cars we've got four tiles making
up those roads.
And then we've got an animation consisting of eight individual sprite's and let's have a look at that
in more detail.
We call the combination of images onto one image the packing of those sprites and I'd recommend that
you always go for ease of use for both you and others and organisation rather than going for optimization.
And we'll have a look back in a second.
So think about how your sprite's sheet is going to be read.
Is it clear what is happening.
Is it clear how you're going to chop those images up.
Is it easy that you're going to chop those images up.
It's very easy to combine multiple different sizes onto one sheet and that will cause you a headache
further down the line.
Now Know your target platforms matched at maximum Textus I see you've got this Sprite she would lots
of textures on it.
But if you make that too large you are going to have a problem especially when it comes to the mobile
environment.
So I recommend no larger than 248 by 248.
In general there will be some exceptions to this depending on what you're working on of course.
I would personally avoid mixing different sprite's sizes so if you've got some sprite's that 8 by 8
Don't mix them with something that's 16 by 16 32 by 32 or any other size.
What that will mean is that it is easy to chop the images up later and you can do that really quickly
rather than having to manually do it which can be a real pain to do.
So here is this image again this Sprite sheet.
This is an optimized Sprite sheet where multiple images have been put in.
1 and that's not always a good thing it's great for optimization because your game will only have to
load up one image so that's quite quick.
However when it comes to splitting them out this is far more usable and you can see there are actually
some more parts to that explosion animation to that sprite sheet there.
Now this is far easier for me to read and far easier for me to make in the extreme example of this is
if I was to give you each image individually and that can be difficult because it doesn't make any sense.
It's very easy unless you've got numbers on the end.
It's very easy to not put things in the right order.
This is explicit if you chopping up from left to right going down like you would read a book.
This happens to be very readable now.
The other two examples the cars and the road are an example of game elements that can be packed into
a sprite sheets rather than animations.
And of course you could have menu items there as well.
Now a line in your work is critical.
If you get it out of alignment when you go and chop up your Sprite sheet it will cause you issues.
So the power of two as we've mentioned before for the image itself the Sprite sheet or an individual
Sprite isn't actually necessary you will hear lots of people saying yes it is yes it is but it's not.
Unfortunately not using power of two can cause some issues.
If you're aware of them you can work around it.
So be aware that the not parity sprite's can bleed into one another and have border issues so as you
put them next to one another if the Sprite itself is going to be mismatched that's a form of optimization
that compresses the image when it comes to the level of detail so you don't have to display full size
textures far away from the viewer.
Well that can end up bleeding and making your sprite's not look how you intended to.
Now consider if you don't have power of two sprites packing them into power two cells so an environment
or extra padding around there that gives the Sprite power of two border around it and this just means
it's going to be easy to chop up later for sanity.
I still recommend sticking with power of two sprites and Sprite sheets as well.
Everything fits together properly and easily.
Let's have a quick look at how you could arrange a couple of Sprite sheets.
Okay so I'm going to draw this one out so we get an idea of what's happening.
So if you have a series of textures and I'm literally just drawing this really quick and let's say there
are eight by eight you can put them these sprites here.
You can put them into an image that would be 32 by eight in total.
So that's packing those sprites and its power of two.
And when it comes to chopping it up later we can say that these are all eight by eight and in most game
engines you can chop them up automatically using that and that's a lot quicker for you to use them then.
Now if you've got odd sized one so if we also had one that was that say this was this is going to be
16 by 16 here.
I would put them as a separate image and depending on how many you've got would depend on how you pack
them so you could go in a straight line like this.
I mean if you like that explosion animation I've decided to pack them into a square which is basically
a 16 by 16 grid.
It's not stop 16 by 16 pixels.
In this case and I've filled all of these here.
As we go down I think that many but there's some wasted space here now it's not wasted if you decide
to optimize further in and put other stuff in that sprite sheet then it's going to be harder later on
to utilize that sprites.
Because you will have to chop it up manually.
It also means that you can name your image appropriately so if this was an explosion then unless these
extra bits that you put in were also related to something explosive.
It can be hard to organize your work and understand where things are stored.
So finally here if you had four eight by eight images this is a perfect image size that's fine.
This is also perfectly valid as well.
It doesn't matter how you orientate them providing it can be read by both a human looking at the Sprite
sheet or a computer cutting up that sprite sheet that is absolutely fine.
Now you will see some Sprite sheets out there that have big images little ones et cetera et cetera and
it looks like they've been randomly placed.
You may be looking at a texture Atlas if that's the case.
The other thing that you might be looking at is an optimized Sprite sheet which is often done at the
very end packing all of the sprites you can into is small a space as possible for optimization.
Now at this stage during the creative process you should not be thinking too hard about optimization
it should all be about how quickly you can iterate through your work.
And this is of course one of the reasons why games in our foreign beta classes are optimize because
often things like the textures won't all be packaged in a neat and sensible manner because we're not
at final release yet.
We are just going through the process of generating all of these once they're all done and dusted and
you're not touching them again.
That would be the time to start the optimization process.
Once you're happy with that being the final product and that now leads us nicely on to the challenge
for this lecture.
So uh I would like you to think about what the minimum power of two size Sprite sheet will be for for
the following sprite's.
Now the reason why I say minimum is of course you could just have a separate sheet that was large enough
to fit them all on out being at all optimized and B want to avoid that as well because that is just
a waste of text space.
So the first one is eight sprites that are eight by eight.
How would you pack phones in into a sprite sheet that also matched power to 11 sprites that are 16 by
16 five Sprites that 8 by 16.
How about seven sprites that are 12 by 15 in size.
What would you do in that case.
And finally he had quite a few sprite's to put in but they were seven by nine.
How would that work out.
Go ahead.
Pause video now and give that a go.
OK everyone welcome back.
Now of course you probably realized whilst doing this exercise that there was more than one correct
answer.
So with that in mind let's go through some of the options that you could have had during this challenge.
Okay welcome back.
In this challenge example.
I'm not gonna do every single one of these you'll see that it will become quite repetitive.
We'll do the eight sprite's there to eight by eight and then we'll do the five Sprites that are eight
by 16 and then the seven sprite's to 12 by 15 the same premice on each one will apply.
So let's start off with the eight sprites that eight by eight.
So when we have eight lots of eight by eight sprites we know that we can have one column.
And eight rows if we wanted to.
So that would make an image that looks like this or similar to this excuse them not being actual squares.
And this is going to be a power of two on each side.
So this would be 64 pixels a cross that's eight by eight and this is going to be a sieve that satisfies
both the requirements.
Now what you can do when you do this in your notice this on all of the examples we've got here is the
other Sprite sheet sizes there are also power off to you simply increase the power of two or one side
and decrease on the other.
So if we go for the next value of a power of two which is 16 we can have 16 by 32.
And at this point it will inflects and become 32 by 16.
So there is an example of almost the complete set.
Until we get all the way back to in this case eight by one they've got to think about readability as
well when it comes to this.
At a picture eight images long being red cross is not going to be too difficult.
But if this was more a cross it may be better to shove it down onto a second row further down so that
it is easier to read especially in thumbnail format when it's smaller.
Obviously when you got it blown up and it's the only thing you see on the screen is a lot easier to
read.
But is it still readable when it's in a thumbnail when you're previewing it.
That is also quite important.
So five Sprites four to eight by 16.
So this is a slightly different tact.
It's eight by 16 and there's five of them.
Let's have a closer look.
So five lots of eight by 16.
I'm just writing this down so I don't forget.
So again we've got here.
A shape four is similar to this an 8 by 16.
And we've got five lots of them so we could go along five times and create something like this like
we did before.
So let's have a look at that five.
Yes I can count brillion.
Okay so we've got this here.
If we do eight times five will soon see that that is not a power of two.
It's 40.
So what do we do.
Well in this case we would enlarge it and we'd have some wasted space and that is okay if that happens.
So in here you'd have another 16 pixels.
No I can't add up another 24 pixels of wasted space going along here that just wouldn't be used.
But that is absolutely fine at this point in time.
Again we're not thinking heavily about optimization.
Of course she need to be aware of it but don't make it your goal your goal at this point in time is
to create sprite's and Sprite sheets and not optimize them.
Finally we've got 20 or sorry seven sprites that are 12 by 15.
I don't want to do the 20 because it's a large number and I can't draw that many.
So we have seven sprites that are 12 by 15.
So the easiest thing to do here if you have a texture is 12 pixels high by 15 pixels wide.
This is going to be a rough representation.
There we go is to pad it out so that when you're chopping it up and placing it it is evenly distributed.
And also as a power of two.
So what we can do is this with here we can add on a pixel just one pixel just there.
So we would in fact just increase the image size itself we wouldn't scale the image with scale the canvas
that the image or the sprite in this case was on that is important.
And on the other side well you could just go straight down and have it in the top corner if you wanted
and have four more pixels here.
Now we can stack them together as 16 by sixteens and then we can follow exactly the same process we've
done before well you've got seven lots of those.
So we could have seven times six.
That's not going to work.
So in this case again this is going to be squares you'd probably end up with something that looks like
this.
With this being 32 this being 64 and of course with there being 7 by the time we get here we've got
a little bit of wasted space at the end.
How did you guys get on.
How did you organize yours.
Did you come to the same conclusion about padding around the images or did you try to fit them in in
slightly different ways.
Please post your results over in the discussions and I will see well in the next lecture.